Red–black trees offer worst-case guarantees for insertion time, deletion time, and search time. Not only does this make them valuable in time-sensitive applications such as real-time applications, but it makes them valuable building blocks in other data structures which provide worst-case guarantees; for example, many data structures used in computational geometry can be based on red–black trees, and the Completely Fair Scheduler used in current Linux kernels and epoll system call implementation[19] uses red–black trees.

The AVL tree is another structure supporting O(log n) search, insertion, and removal. AVL trees can be colored red-black, thus are a subset of RB trees. Worst-case height is 0.720 times the worst-case height of RB trees, so AVL trees are more rigidly balanced. The performance measurements of Ben Pfaff with realistic test cases in 79 runs find AVL to RB ratios between 0.677 and 1.077, median at 0.947, and geometric mean 0.910.[20] WAVL trees have a performance in between those two.

Red–black trees are also particularly valuable in functional programming, where they are one of the most common persistent data structures, used to construct associative arrays and sets which can retain previous versions after mutations. The persistent version of red–black trees requires O(log n) space for each insertion or deletion, in addition to time.

For every 2-4 tree, there are corresponding red–black trees with data elements in the same order. The insertion and deletion operations on 2-4 trees are also equivalent to color-flipping and rotations in red–black trees. This makes 2-4 trees an important tool for understanding the logic behind red–black trees, and this is why many introductory algorithm texts introduce 2-4 trees just before red–black trees, even though 2-4 trees are not often used in practice.

In 2008, Sedgewick introduced a simpler version of the red–black tree called the left-leaning red–black tree[21] by eliminating a previously unspecified degree of freedom in the implementation. The LLRB maintains an additional invariant that all red links must lean left except during inserts and deletes. Red–black trees can be made isometric to either 2-3 trees,[22] or 2-4 trees,[21] for any sequence of operations. The 2-4 tree isometry was described in 1978 by Sedgewick.[This quote needs a citation] With 2-4 trees, the isometry is resolved by a "color flip," corresponding to a split, in which the red color of two children nodes leaves the children and moves to the parent node.

The original description of the tango tree, a type of tree optimized for fast searches, specifically uses red–black trees as part of its data structure.[23]

As of Java 8, the HashMap has been modified such that instead of using a LinkedList to store different elements with colliding hashcodes, a red-black tree is used. This results in the improvement of time complexity of searching such an element from O(n) to O(log n).[24]

In addition to the single-element insert, delete and lookup operations, several set operations have been defined on red-black trees: union, intersection and set difference. Then fast bulk operations on insertions or deletions can be implemented based on these set functions. These set operations rely on two helper operations, Split and Join. With the new operations, the implementation of red-black trees can be more efficient and highly-parallelizable.[27] This implementation allows a red root.

Join: The function Join is on two red-black trees t1 and t2 and a key k and will return a tree containing all elements in t1, t2 as well as k. It requires k to be greater than all keys in t1 and smaller than all keys in t2. If the two trees have the same black height, Join simply create a new node with left subtree t1, root k and right subtree t2. If both t1 and t2 have black root, set k to be red. Otherwise k is set black. Suppose that t1 has larger black height than t2 (the other case is symmetric). Join follows the right spine of t1 until a black node c which is balanced with t2. At this point a new node with left child c, root k (set to be red) and right child t2 is created to replace c. The new node may invalidate the red-black invariant because at most three red nodes can appear in a row. This can be fixed with a double rotation. If double red issue propagates to the root, the root is then set to be black, restoring the properties. The cost of this function is the difference of the black heights between the two input trees.
Split: To split a red-black tree into two smaller trees, those smaller than key x, and those larger than key x, first draw a path from the root by inserting x into the red-black tree. After this insertion, all values less than x will be found on the left of the path, and all values greater than x will be found on the right. By applying Join, all the subtrees on the left side are merged bottom-up using keys on the path as intermediate nodes from bottom to top to form the left tree, and the right part is asymmetric. For some applications, Split also returns a boolean value denoting if x appears in the tree. The cost of Split is {\displaystyle O(\log n)}O(\log n), order of the height of the tree. This algorithm actually has nothing to do with any special properties of a red-black tree, and thus is generic to other balancing schemes such as AVL trees.