A new start-up has just launched a new generation connected watch. They have named it eSmart !
The manufacturers of this revolutionary ‘smartwatch’ have made a real impression at the beginning of this year, with thousands of customers already convinced. The eSmart is the first high-tech new generation connected watch which is 3 TIMES less expensive than its direct competitors. The pickiest customers have all fallen for its sleek design, the ergonomics of its body and its ease of use.

The sales have really skyrocketed all over the world…

And we wanted to help you understand why and how this connected watch has become popular so quickly?!

It is a known fact that the big brands earn huge amounts profits from their sales. Every year, they persuade customers to purchase supposedly new connected watches with the same functionalities as the previous versions but always at a higher price… (almost the price of an iPhone).

We have asked ourselves: would we be able to manufacture a connected watch as performant as a Samsung Galaxy or other connected watches which are currently ‘dominating’ the technological market without breaking the bank ?

We have conducted our own research in order to find out why everybody started choosing the eSmart over, for example, a Samsung connected watch.

What is it?
It is called eSmartand has already conquered the hearts of thousands of users who have swapped their watch (classical or connected) for this technological beauty… Not surprising, considering it’s very similar to other high-performing connected watches, except a lot cheaper!


The eSmart is distributed by a French start-up, which shares the same Chinese manufacturing factories as its direct competitors - the quality of the parts used in the fabrication process is similar to the quality of those used in a Samsung, Fitbit or any other connected watch currently dominant on the market.

This savant mix of technology has been developed in the same manner as other more expensive models of connected watches. The responsiveness to the touch is truly amazing and this high-tech connected watch is extremely fast and fluid! The operating system used by this watch is completely optimised in order to prevent any bug.

Why is the eSmart so popular?

After a thorough observation of the company which manufactures the eSmart, we have concluded that this start-up has focused on the most important things:

+ The first Fitness watch with a high-performing heart monitor.

+ HD touchscreen with an exceptional lighting which adapts to the natural environmental light.

+ A highly-reliable heart rate monitor.

+ Sleep and fitness tracker, as well as heart monitor all integrated in a connected watch which is 100% waterproof.

+ The eSmart will help you track your progress and will encourage you to be more active.

+ Personal vocal assistant integrated functionality which allows the user to answer calls, organise meetings and receive notifications (SMS, Facebook, WhatsApp, Gmail…).


For most connected watches lovers, these are the most important characteristics. The connected watch has been designed in such a way as to ensure that you are always up to date and functionalities such as the heart monitor provides you with much-needed peace of mind.

The eSmart also has an in-built phone assistance technology which allows everyone, especially the most vulnerable people, to access help quickly in case of an emergency. Amongst other advanced functionalities present in the eSmart, are the localisation by GPS and wifi, reminders and alarms for medication as well as notifications for other tasks and important events. Last but not least, an application for the weather forecast!